Music In Context Essay Notes
Seminal Albums.
Ambient Works 85-92 – Aphex Twin.
Released with Apollo Records on November 9th, 1992.
Influence in IDM and electronic dance music.
To Do:
Verify the pop culture / visual media samples used in various tracks.
Research Richard D. James’ early life and musical journey.
The origins of Rephlex records, esp. the influence of ambient works and AT’s style on the label.
The authenticity of the cat mangled tape cassette story, and a general perspective on lo-fi / tape
artefacting.
Examine the history of acid as a genre and style, esp. wrt AT’s earlier work.
Research Materials:
http://bytenoise.co.uk/The_Aphex_Effect.jpg
https://archive.org/details/energyflashjourn0000reyn
https://web.archive.org/web/20180502140845if_/http://www.in-a-different-
place.com/albumlist/reviews/aphex_twin_selected_ambient_works.jpg
https://pitchfork.com/reviews/albums/223-selected-ambient-works-85-92/
Order the tracks may have been created:
https://www.reddit.com/r/aphextwin/comments/p5max3/my_estimates_on_which_year_each_song_from
_saw/?rdt=59865 (This is not a credible source but it’s better than nothing)
https://lannerchronicle.wordpress.com/2021/06/29/unheard-demo-tapes-under-construction/
https://lannerchronicle.wordpress.com/2020/10/14/aphex-twinq-magazine-november-2014/
Essay Text:
Introduction: What, Why, How.
Selected Ambient Works 85-92 was released with Apollo Records – A subsidiary of R&S – on November
9th, 1992. The album represents the debut of Richard D. James under the pseudonym Aphex Twin,
although it was not his first foray into published music, with the EP Analogue Bubblebath released the
year prior through Mighty Force Records, and the EP Didgeridoo with R&S only a month before Ambient
Works, to much acclaim in the underground.
The record entered the dance charts at no.6 on the 26th of December 1992, and developed “a huge
underground reputation” according to Jon Savage in 1993 – however, this underground status is now
distant, with Ambient Works featuring at the number one spot on Pitchfork’s 50 Best IDM Albums of All
Time, and representing the popular starting point of the monolith that is Aphex Twin in modern electronic
music.
In this essay, I will examine the impact and legacy of The Aphex Twin’s Ambient Works 85-92 from the
perspective of a contemporary electronic musician, as well as looking at the cultural, social, and
technological context of the record’s release to prove that this work represents a foundational cornerstone
of IDM and ambient techno.
Main Body: Production, Context, Legacy and Impact.
Production:

Analysing the production of this record with more than 30 years of releases and technological
developments is a fascinating task. The technical context differs broadly from that of the contemporary
digital producer, even on the base level of the recording medium – each of these tracks has pulled from a
large collection of cassette tapes, from around 7 years of constant musical creation on James’ part; this
fact can easily be heard in the consistent artefacting, pops, dropouts, and tape hiss present in each track to
varying degrees – from the perspective of fidelity, the treatment of the tapes has not been kind, but this
damage has lent the recordings a quality that perfectly suits the nostalgic ear; in fact, James himself
commented on the damage to the tape on Xtal in a profile from Future Music in ‘93: “With the first track
[Xtal on Ambient Works] the tape had chewed in about seven places... it would have been easy to edit out
the glitches digitally, but it’s a retrospective look, and the tape munching was all part of the stuff I was
doing, so I’ve left it in.”

Another interesting point from the same article is James’ opinion on the classic Roland TR-808 drum
sounds used on much of the album “I don’t want to use pre-programmed drum sounds. I’ve used modified
[Roland TR-]808 sounds on Ambient Works, but that’s because the tracks are around four to five years
old.” In my critical opinion, the 808 sounds are easily the most poorly aged element of the album, feeling
dated in their simplicity and lack of processing – the drum tracks on Ageispolis, for example, feel
painfully dry in comparison to the richer textures of James’ drum parts in works after Ambient Works.

A particular contextual difference from most contemporary producers is James’ access and approach to music hardware
– where the modern electronic artist has a range of uniform, off the shelf tools (and crucially, these are
software tools) to recreate or innovate in any way that might want, an artist in the late 80s and early 90s
was limited by what they were able to find in local stores or order from magazines. In James’ case, this
encouraged a great deal of customisation at the electronic hardware level, indeed leaving very little of his
hardware unmodified: “The only keyboard I haven’t changed is the Korg MS20.” 
In this way, he shows a preference for the Buchla practice of electronic synthesis, rather than the Moog; a shift away 
from the 

Context:

With the advent of “Electronic Listening Music” (which later became known by the dubiously accurate
term Intelligent Dance Music, or IDM) in the early ‘90s, an album of quiet, accessible ambient techno
tracks was a niche that Ambient Works filled perfectly – also benefitting from the concurrent trend for
“chill-out” music, a supplement to the fatiguing intensity of acid and hardcore.
Neil Mason, editor for the magazine Electronic Sound is quoted in The Independent: “The thing about
Selected Ambient Works 85-92 is that it arrived at exactly the right time. The acid house explosion of
1988 had ushered in an entirely new genre of music, but by 1992 it was beginning to settle, and this sort
of music was starting to cross over.”

Nostalgia has been a driving force in popular music for as long as there has been a past canon, and James’
work is no exception – several of the tracks make use of popular media samples, most recognisably a
sample from Willy Wonka and the Chocolate Factory, an excerpt from Gene Wilder’s quotation of Ode
by Arthur O'Shaughnessy, which the track We Are the Music Makers is presumably titled after. This film
was released in 1971, the same year that James was born, making it a distinctly retrospective inclusion,
and a twist on the media sampling style that developed in hardcore techno.
An interesting facet of this albums styling is the title, particularly the word Selected; this word could
reasonably be construed as meaning the release is a compilation, a collection of tracks that had already
been released, but as mentioned earlier, this was the first full release by James under the name of Aphex
Twin, and does not feature any music that he had officially published under other pseudonyms. The
Selected then, could be said to style an artist without a real published discography as established, an old
hand; arguably, this is not a mis-advertisement, as James is styled as something of a crate digger in his
own work, so prolific in his creation that he loses track of tapes as the only existing copy of a track is
handed off to a personal friend, or lost in a stack of similar tapes – [[FIND THE REFERENCE FOR
THE AMOUNT OF TAPES / RECORDING AT HAD]]
Personal Listening Analysis:

Xtal:
Opening with a classic dance hi-hat pattern panned heavily to the right, the texture of this track gradually
builds from the top down, with the hi-hat joined quickly by a rising set of mellow, syncopated synth
chords, building again to the introduction of a deep, 115 bpm kick, drenched in reverb.
After a few measures of this texture, the sampled vocal that decorates much of the track drifts in – a
meandering, wordless melody that drifts in and out of focus as the texture again changes at the minute
mark; the driving kick is modified, joined by a syncopated snare sample that shares the same dark, washy
reverb. It is also at this point that an active listener might realise that the syncopated chords are being
gradually replaced by softer, slow-moving pads that blend with the reverb tails of much of the overall
texture.

The overall structure of this track is relatively dense compared to other works in a strictly ambient style –
such as Eno’s Music For Airports – with a steady movement between sections, and clear-cut transitions
that reward the active listener, a trend that continues through most of the album. This does not, however,
demand the listener’s attention fully at any point, with the album very effectively drifting into the
background of whatever task the listener might be engaged in – with the possible exception of Green
Calx, where the more industrial tone and harder textures can be a little jarring as a background, although
repetitive enough to fade back out of focus.

Methodology:
My general working process in this essay has been focused on journalistic articles from close to the
original release of Ambient Works, while also drawing from academic writing on the history of electronic
music. The Wikipedia article for Ambient Works provided a great starting point for sources, with a broad
selection of sources to pull from – it should be noted that the actual content of the Wikipedia article was
not treated as a source for this essay. I also made use of Google Scholar and standard Google searches to
find articles and reviews.

I have also undertaken some primary research in a critical listening analysis of 3 tracks from the album,
making use of my own experiences and tastes, while also considering the historical context of the overall
work – while I am of course a novice in comparison to James’ in his contemporary work, my experience
as a (broadly) self-taught electronic producer allow me a particular perspective on this early work of the
prolific Aphex Twin.

[[RETROSPECTIVE OF THE OVERALL PROCESS OF RESEARCH GOES HERE]]
